okay so this is the moon part two and
although you probably knew quite a lot
of the material that I put in part one
part two might have some surprises so I
hope there's some new things in here
we're actually going to look at the moon
first of all by using some color filters
and even with amateur equipment you can
start to see some difference in the
color of different bits of the surface
of the Moon this picture here has just
got a hint of the fact that it's not
entirely grey over the whole of the
surface you can see that some of the
moiré have a slightly blue tinge and
others are more of a greeny grey in this
particular photograph
in here at the same region of the moon
we've got the Plato crater at the top
left there and the alpine valley Mari
Imbrium the bottom left we've got the
big crater Copernicus about 250 million
years old
and typically everything's looking very
great but if you really play with the
filters and go to town you can reveal
what the eye cannot see which is really
quite dramatic amounts of color you try
hard to pull the color out of the images
start to see here that there really are
differences between the different
regions so you can see their crater
Copernicus there has brought up new
material and that's got a different hue
to it some of the older regions have got
a very brown color and others that had
much deeper blue now they tell me that
this can be used to identify different
minerals on the moon and we'll talk
about that in more detail as we go
through but I'm really just want you to
enjoy some of the photographs and
showing the moon in a different light
making it really rather more interesting
than just a massive grey crater so
here's the Mari Imbrium again and we've
really processed the the colors quite
neatly you can see the Plato crater top
center there flooded with the brown
material you can see the blue colors
down there towards the wrinkled ridges
and yet their Bay of rainbows on the X
mid left side of the screen there again
that same Reddy brown color but if you
look at the
crater over there towards the right-hand
side of Murray Imbrium you see it's
almost got a pale greeny colour and we
think that what's going on here is we're
bringing up materials that may contain
metals from deeper inside the moon
perhaps bringing some some of those
materials with the incoming space rock
and changing the overall composition of
the moon so it's important to think some
of these materials may have been from
the ancient part of the Moon and others
may have been delivered from space and
you can start to piece together some of
the history of the Moon using that
here's one of the brightest areas on the
moon this is the Aristarchus region
named after the scientists that we were
talking about in part one who worked out
the distance to the moon there's been
some volcanic activity here and also a
relatively new very bright looking
crater we can see some old collapsed
lava tubes rills running through the
brown region and then that's completely
surrounded by that that bluer color
material going off in different
directions and so here we it looks like
the older material from the volcanic
period is the brown substance and we can
actually identify that as feldspar
whereas the blue regions those are
titanium rich Rock titanium really quite
a common element but not the most common
by by any stretch of the imagination and
it's quite interesting to see just how
much titanium there is in some regions
of the Moon there and again it looks
like the impact crater has probably
brought some other minerals either Willy
or up from underneath and given some of
the greener regions
again a complete mixed terrain here
we've got some very interesting yellow
and red colors as well as more of that
blue titanium rich material and down at
the region's there some of those endemic
craters and nicely we can zoom in on it
you can see how the lava tube has
collapsed and the craters have punched
holes right features the color really
does help you see is the full moon again
that same photograph just to show you we
can colorize the whole thing and again
you can see some of the seas are blue
others are brown we looked to start with
at the two that were mostly brown and
that suggested that that's the feldspar
material whereas the titanium rich rocks
seem to only be in all of the other
moiré
that's very interesting isn't it and
then of course we got the very bright
impact craters again with their rays
showing fresh new material stretching it
around the moon now here's a picture I
think they've gone rather too far here
perhaps this was NASA that produced this
one using data from the Galileo
spacecraft they have not just gone for
false-color but complete psychedelia
really and again they're picking out and
identifying the different regions we got
the titanium rich blue the feldspar the
recent impact ejector the basalt lava
flows and the more recent lava flows all
picked out in different colors here
using more or less the same color scheme
they really haven't
and colored it in they've just enhanced
what color is naturally there to the
absolute maximum here I think
so if we look at what this is all
telling us about the composition of the
moon we find that the lunar soil is
40-something percent oxygen 20 something
percent silicon well that's fairly
natural because silicon dioxide is sand
and many of the minerals are silicates
which is SiO 3 silicon and three oxygens
combined with some metals and then we've
got iron as the most common metal to
combine with the silicates calcium
aluminium magnesium and then lumped
together are all the rest of the
elements under other there and so you
can see that that titanium this doesn't
actually turn the four most common metal
in soil if we compare different regions
of the moon the lunar lowlands and the
lunar Highlands with the Earth's crust
again we can see that the shape here is
more or less the same we've got round
about 45 percent oxygen from all three
sources roughly the same proportion of
silicate aluminium well interestingly
the lunar Highlands are containing more
aluminium than either of the earth or
the lunar lowlands whereas when you go
to the lowlands
it's the sorry when you go to iron it is
the lunar lowlands that stick out as
being different and the earth matches
the lunar Highlands so that's slightly
curious and then you are calcium they're
all different
sodium yeah it's got a lot more sodium
for some reason and potassium well most
who are very similar so no surprise
there and magnesium well it's following
along the the trend in some ways but not
in others and then massive spike for
titanium there on the lunar lowland
whereas the earth and the
Islands contain very little so this
something been going on here that's
quite interesting from the point of view
of how this chemical composition must
have create got created that leads us
onto the question of the origin of the
Moon so various theories been put
forward over time one is that it formed
along with the earth condensing together
out of the same nebula so inside the
group of rotating gas and dust a solar
nebula when the solar system formed
perhaps the earth condensed out of a
particularly over dense region of it and
the moon condensed at the same time and
naturally formed hand in glove with the
earth alright Aries that the wandering
body that formed somewhere else and just
came too close to the earth and got
captured into orbit by the Earth's
gravity well there's another possibility
I suppose the third idea was that it was
split away from the earth and even that
that splitting occurred because the
earth was spinning very fast and the
centrifugal force might have detached a
lump of it that then flew up into orbit
and people have sometimes suggested that
there might have come from the Pacific
Ocean because that looks like a big hole
in the ground on the earth but we now
know that's not right and that the
Pacific Ocean hasn't always been there
because the continents move around and
anyway the mathematics of the energy and
the rotation speed of the earth and so
forth just don't really add up to it
being able to throw a large object like
the moon away from itself out into orbit
like that it just would not have the
energy to do it so I don't think this
sort of idea here is really tenable at
all oh the other way
be split off from the earth is by a
collision and this is probably the most
popular explanation that way back around
about 4000 million years ago when the
earth was fairly young a stray planetoid
smashed into the earth and blasted
material off the surface which then well
as we've seen we know the chemical
composition of the moon and we know it
very well not just from studying the
light and the spectra and the colors of
the moon but we can also analyze the
three hundred and something kilograms of
space rock that the various Apollo
missions brought back with them and
determine the exact chemistry from the
different samples back here in the lab
and when we do that we find things match
between the earth and the moon really
quite nicely if we look particularly at
the different amounts of the different
isotopes of different elements in the
material and this chart on the left is
an oxygen isotope plot so it's looking
at how many of the oxygen atoms are
carrying two extra neutrons along the
horizontal axis the oxygen 18 and how
many are only carrying one extra Neutron
the oxygen 17 up the vertical axis and
you can see the little red stars for the
moon samples are all on a nice straight
line and that straight line matches the
entire chemistry of the earth incredibly
well whereas various meteorites that
we've collected that we know have come
from Mars don't match they're the little
greens try out the diamonds and they're
above the line and we even have samples
of the asteroid Vesta and those are
clustered down as the blue squares and
they're below the line so they they
don't match so we're fairly confident
that that signature of
oxygen and of lots of other elements
that have been analyzed in the same way
all points to the fact that the moon
surface and the Earth's surface are made
largely of the same stuff but right back
at the beginning we also realized that
the moon didn't have the same density as
the earth back in part one we talked
about the fact that the moon is a 64th
of the volume of the earth but it's only
one 80th of the density and that we
think is because it only has a rather
tiny iron core it didn't really end up
with a huge iron core in the same
proportion to that that the earth has
even for its size the answer putting all
of that together it's not likely to be a
captured asteroid because the chemistry
doesn't match particularly those oxygen
and isotopes think that they co condense
together probably if I had the
proportion of iron in the core would be
about the same and the moon seems to
have been shortchanged in terms of iron
in its core so the commonality between
the Earth's crust and the outer layers
of the Moon in terms of isotopes
suggests that it was split away from the
earth somehow and pulled out the
spinning too fast idea so it really
leaves us with all the big splat which
is that the earth formed about
four-and-a-half billion years ago and
then about four billion years ago the
earth was hit by another small planetoid
perhaps at a glancing angle and blew a
lot of the material out into orbit and
the two metal cores of the incoming
planetoid and the proto-earth probably
merged together giving earth a very
large iron core but not much of the iron
was blasted into orbit
une formed out of the debris and the
impact ripped away that was thrown
around the earth into the orbit around
and probably didn't have so much of a
proportion of iron and that explains why
the moon and efficient in its core so
the Earth's iron core is left behind the
moon from the orbiting debris didn't get
much of it okay so this is called the
Thea hypothesis Thea they have chosen as
the name for this theoretical planetoid
but perhaps formed in the same orbit as
the earth that's the same 93 million
miles from the Sun at one of the
semi-stable Lagrange points l4 and l5
these are shown in the first diagram at
the top right 60 degrees ahead and 60
degrees behind the earth there's a semi
stable point at which you can park an
object and the combined effect of the
orbital motion and the earth and Sun's
gravity will keep it roughly in that
position but it's not entirely stable
due to perturbations from the other
planets of the solar system and so it
would tend to wander away and then back
again and further away and back again
and eventually if it wanders too far
then it will come close to the earth and
collide with it and of course it would
collide at a relatively modest speed so
not likely to completely destroy the
earth but enough to blast a lot of the
material up out into orbit to
subsequently recover under gravity and
coalesce to form the moon so that's the
idea of the Thea hypothesis of the moon
and lots of people have done computer
models of that now from time to time we
hear stories about the earth perhaps
having more than one moon and this has
been a favorite sport of people for some
time
18:46 Frederick Petitte of the Toulouse
Observatory actually reported that he
had seen a second moon of the earth and
this became called pettit moon and it's
referred to in Jules Verne's book there
from the earth to the moon they may take
off in their spacecraft fired from a
giant cannon and they passed by Pettit's
moon on the way to the Earth's actual
moon so it had become accepted as as a
real thing for quite some time of course
it's not really there so I'm not quite
sure what it was that Frederick Pettit
was observing I mean he had a thoroughly
good professional observatory at his
disposal so what he was looking at
interestingly if the Theia hypothesis is
correct then at one time on earth it
would have perhaps had a selection of
moonlets and indeed a set of rings after
Thea had impacted and blasted all of
that material out into orbit around it
there wouldn't have been one large chunk
to make one large moon it would have
probably resulted in the earth having
rings and dozens of small moon lots of
varying sizes all flying around all on
different chaotic orbits
but over time they've all either hit the
moon or hit the earth it's possible some
of them might have been ejected from the
system from random collisions between
them but nevertheless probably most of
them were collected up by the gravity of
the earth or the moon in the process now
when we look at the moon and we have a
look at the Maurya the Seas not just
with visible lights but with other
methods so we've got three images here
the visible image picture on the left
that we're familiar with we've got a
radar height map where the orbiting
satellite measured the height of the
ground blue is low lying and followed by
yellow and then red for the highland
regions so you can see that in fact the
Maurya are colored in blue and are
therefore holes in the ground which is
consistent with them being caused by
impacts but we can also look at the
gravity of the moon they put a couple of
space probes orbiting around the moon
and measured how their orbit changed due
to gravity anomalies which are over or
under dense regions in the gravity of
the Moon and you can see that there are
quite significant features for these
gravity anomalies aligning with some of
the larger moiré the deep blue colored
splotches on that right-hand image and
also there's a big blue irregular rim
running almost right around that face of
the moon which we'll have a look at in a
moment so we know that these moiré are
all the results of giant asteroid
impacts on the moon they crashed into it
and made enormous craters a very long
time ago very ancient indeed and it's
possible that these are the scars of the
moon collecting up all of its smaller
sister moons that were formed in that
giant impact
look at the ocean of storms the biggest
of the seas on the moon over on me what
we see is the left-hand side when we
look at it in the sky and we can put the
gravity anomalies on there in blue for
you you can see that they ring right
around the outside of the ocean of
storms
and they were probably lava running in
those cracks and it suggests that there
was a mega nur impact that perhaps
nearly destroyed the moon so perhaps one
of the moons larger sisters smashed into
the ocean of storms there and created
that enormous disturbance and we still
see the result of it today and then of
course smaller impacts have happened on
top of it which you've confused the
picture somewhat but of course fraud
till we have their Space Age we couldn't
see the far side of the Moon due to the
moon always keeping one face turned
towards us but now we have images from
spacecraft that have gone round and
brought these marvelous pictures back to
us and it looks very different yeah I
know it looks grey and it's covered in
craters but there are a couple of sort
of weedy looking moiré but not the same
sort of structure that we see on the
near side so the two halves really are
rather different when we look in the
gravity anomalies again we can see that
the moon has on the far side been
peppered by a whole range of small
craters and large craters and
medium-sized ones in between and we can
do that same thing of looking to see how
they overlap and stack but we can also
see down at the South Pole there the
huge dent in the bottom of the moon
called yourself a keen basin and all of
this points to a structure of the moon
where the small core of the object was
formed slightly nearer the near side of
the earth to the earth than the far side
and the crust on the near side of the
Moon is much thinner than the crust on
the far side that's due to the
distorting effects of the gravity of the
earth which really confirms that the
molten moon
cooled down and solidified in orbit
around the earth so I think that's very
very good evidence again pointing
towards the fear hypothesis certainly
points away from the idea that the moon
formed somewhere else and was
subsequently captured because if it had
formed in isolation
it would have been symmetrical in all
because the gravity would have been
equal in all directions and I wouldn't
have had a large distorting effect of a
big neighboring planet like the earth to
contend with now of course that thin
crust on the near side explains the
moire
I mean why there are so many of them and
that's because most of them managed to
puncture right through the thin crust
and then molten rock would flow up
through the holes and flood them whereas
with the crust being much thicker on the
far side even large impacts failed to
penetrate through the solid layer down
and release the molten rock out to do
that flooding process so it kind of all
fits together but if we look round at
the South Pole that's south polar Aitken
basin that I measured again using this
color-coded gravity that blue being or a
deep hole here we have a six kilometer
deep depression in the under surface the
south polar region of the Moon so this
again looks like another impact of a
fairly large object possibly another one
of these sister moons of them the moon
being absorbed as a slow-speed impact
they would nudge into each other if you
had high-speed impact of something of
this sort of size it might even destroy
the moon
so the fact that it was a slow speed
impact points towards the fact that it
could have been co-orbiting around the
earth at the same time and that would
result in a much lower relative velocity
so much more gentle impact
but we do have other objects that are
playing this same game of following the
earth around in its orbit but a little
animation going on here of an asteroid
called crew with me that perhaps isn't
really a moon of the earth but is
nevertheless a companion in space
because chrony takes exactly one year to
complete its red orbit as we do on the
blue orbit therefore the earth and so we
keep meeting up we at this point we're
coming close together we don't quite
intersect then we move further apart
again but if you look at the left-hand
diagram where instead of allowing the
Copernican view of the Sun being
stationary in the middle we make the
earth appear stationary you can see how
crew with me
creates one of these kidney-shaped
yellow traces of an orbit so it comes
close to the earth and then wanders away
again so from our point of view it's
definitely almost captured by the
Earth's gravity and then escapes again
so not really a second moon that
survived this long anyway but there is
an object that has been in orbit around
the moon around the earth for some time
and that is asteroid 2016 HRE it's
discovered back in that year and this
animation shows the path of H a 13
around the earth and around the Sun so
you could argue that it's orbiting the
Sun and the red line is the the orbit
but he really looks pretty much from the
yellow trace relative to the earth that
it's in fact orbiting around the earth
now the distance is really quite a lot
further away from the earth than our
regular moon is and it's not necessarily
a permanent attachment because the
perturbations of the gravity of other
planets may well throw a tow 13 back out
to going back into a proper solar orbit
and tear it away from the earth but we
think that it's going to follow us
around at least for a few hundred years
so you can see there it says it's nine
million miles away from the earth so
that's so 36 times further away than our
moon is right so this brings us to the
the end of the discussion if the moon
that's all I could think of to to say
about it but I hope you've enjoyed it
it's certainly with those color
photographs shows it literally in a new
light and adds an extra dimension of
interest to observing the moon I think
some of those regions that are titanium
rich may well have come from the impact
of asteroids from another part of the
solar system with different chemistry
other parts of the moon's surface may
have come from the sister moons from the
Theia impact being captured and forming
back together to the one moon that we
have today which may explain why we have
those differences in the chemistry of
the different regions of the outer
surface of the Moon so I'll bring that
to an end there I hope you enjoyed